---
title: Current Work
weight: 4
bookFlatSection: false
---

# Current Work

## Brief
In this section I will provide some commentary on the current work to date. This includes compositions and writing that is either complete or in progress. Each piece acts as a snapshot of my relationship to the computer in my practice as an artist-programmer at the time in which the work was written. As such, the collection of portfolio pieces help to open up discussion about the way that this relationship is changing over time, and the relevant conceptual and aesthetics influences that drive these changes.

## Stitch/Strata
Stitch/Strata began as a prompt from my supervisors, to create a work inside of the computer and without live input from an instrumentalist. At this time I was critical of previous systems I had created and how successful outputs of the systems were weighted toward the instrumentalist’s input for control and musical formal development. Without a performer to drive the system through interaction I was suddenly responsible for every aspect of the music - nothing could be assumed to be taken care of in the program unless it was specifically modelled and encoded. Without the fallback of some human input to drive the electronic aspect, my specific concern was how to deal with the hierarchical nature of musical form, and its relationship to programmatic structures. A performer interacting with a system in real time and in an improvisatory context can generate structure as a byproduct of localised interactions. The contours of a work like this largely emerge from the performer knowing how the system works (perhaps roughly) and they can distribute ideas over time that they think will work well together or create an interesting enough musical narrative. This piece began as challenge to work with just the computer, and mutated into a question about my relationship to form, as well as my engagement with form through code. The various stages and versions of this piece portray a number of different tactics, strategies and approaches that I explored for solving this problem.

The final product culminated in a performance at the 2019 Electric Spring festival, and this presentation of the piece constitutes its completed form. There were a number of versions where the piece was shaping up to be a different work altogether. From the outset, I was trying to have the computer make formal decisions at all hierarchical levels. There were processes for concatenating individual phonetic samples and to piece groups of these together - however, many methods I attempted to make longer term structures from these were fruitless. My solution to this was to use the computer to take care of the micro- and mesoscopic structure while I would take care of the higher level organisation of these groupings. Finding the right way to model macro-structure was tiring, unfulfilling and a process of constantly cleaning up leaks that would appear after testing the outputs. It felt that the role of the computer was superfluous because I was having to invest so much laborious manual effort while I could have achieved the same thing manually fixing this aspect of the structure anyway. Working on this piece and coming up against multiple conceptual and technical barriers introduced me to the infinite regress of arbitrarily modelling one’s own decision making. It’s quite simple to model short term changes because the scope of evolution is perceptually manageable and more easily encoded in a numerical or algorithmic format. Modelling longer form ideas almost has nothing to do with thinking about change over time in this way and it’s difficult to encode more abstract ideas pertaining to memory and the connections that are perceived over greater spans of time in music. *Annealing Strategies*, which followed *Stitch/Strata*, revisits a lot of the frustrations with form that emerged when writing this piece. *Annealing Strategies* demonstrates a significant evolution in my practice - allowing the computer to make more sophisticated decisions, as well as finding and inventing technical strategies to support this.

## Annealing Strategies & JCMS
*Annealing Strategies* (2018) has not yet been performed in a concert setting, but I have given two presentations on the development of this piece and the results that emerged from this process. There is some additional development that I would like to explore but have avoided in favour of starting new projects and pieces. I envisage that in the next academic year I will revisit the piece to address some of the feedback that was received from presenting the work to public audiences. 

Giving the two presentations about this work, at the 2019 Creative Coding Lab Symposium, and the CeReNeM colloquium, functioned as a useful reflective exercise - leading me toward salient points in the research as well as helping me answer some of conceptual questions and achieve artistic goals. At the time of composition I was increasingly frustrated working with code to model multiple hierarchical levels of musical form. It was tiring, frustrating and musically unfulfilling to encode every component of my approach to form in an algorithmic fashion. In a sense, I was working in a strange and unintuitive way - why would I use the computer to model my own tendencies and tastes when there is a plethora of approaches centred in the computer making ‘computerly’ decisions, rather than trying to recreate me. I could just go and write the music myself! The friction between my compositional language and the programmatic language was exposed through these frustrations. When both of these aspects are complex the tension that is created by trying to manage both dampens the creative process and the conceptual aspect starts to become tangled with the technical requirements for realising these. A project can become technically unmanageable in a number of ways:

- Takes too long to make an audible sound.
- Difficult to track compositional development while managing complex technical requirements.
- Developing compositional concepts and ideas has to be sacrificed in favour of exploring a potential idea in the technical side of things. You are constantly trying to manage the time trade off of each.

To this end, I constructed a set of aims that would ground the compositional goals and aims of Annealing Strategies:

- Material
    - Create a self-referencing material ‘space’. 
    - The space should be focused and not broad or random.
    - Each iteration should ‘belong’ to the system.
    - Given the constraints of the material space, there should be a richness in timbre and dynamics.
- Time
    - How can time be managed in a way that I am not…
        - Manually constructing and fixing sections.
        - Composing ‘composites’ that are then glued and reorganised to create variety
        - Investing compositional energy into the micro-structure in the hope that it will give rise to an intelligible and interesting macro-structure.
- Intentionality
    - I want the piece to feel ‘intentional’ and not just a series of randomly selected sounds. The sense of intentionality is difficult to ascribe to a musical system, but easily heard and understood as a listener. How can I communicate this?

Serendipitously, I came across a [code emulation](https://cycling74.com/forums/recreating-a-horsefourses-oscillator/) of Ciat-Lonbarde (Peter Blasser’s) synthesiser the [Fyrall](www.ciat-lonbarde.net/fyrall/index.html) - an effort that was driven by a number of people including Pierre-Alexandre Tremblay and Rodrigo Constanzo. I was immediately enamoured with the synthesis algorithm’s sonic output and the variety of sounds that were produced through controlling its 24 parameters. From one perspective I was considering what I could use from the synthesiser that was presented to me first - engaging with the immediate affordances shown to me through trivial experimentation. From another, I was strategising how I might discover ‘edge cases’ of the synthesiser’s parameters - unusual combinations of parameters where the sound evolved on its own (due to feedback), or exhibited behaviours that were fleeting and unique. A particular set of edge case that interested me were the combinations that resulted in delicate, restricted and quiet sounds that contrasted with the majority of noisy full spectrum outputs. 

Through rather general research into machine learning literature I came across the simulated annealing (SA) algorithm. This algorithm appealed to me for many reasons for the purpose of exploring the subtleties and nuances of the synth.

1. I do not have a mathematics background and the SA algorithm in its most simple form doesn’t require a significant in depth knowledge of statistics or mathematics to use.
2. ‘Pseudo-code’ was available in many places including [YouTube](https://youtu.be/eBmU1ONJ-os) and [Stack Exchange](https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/40818/help-with-understanding-simulated-annealing-algorithm). Pseudo-code offers a domain-free abstract representation of the steps required to create the algorithm. This means I could use these as a source to create the algorithm in Max from the ground up. 
3. SA can be applied to a number of inputs - it is a fairly generic algorithm that is concerned with change, no matter what the change in question is.

In SA, the algorithm stochastically wanders a multidimensional space of possible values identifying movements that result in a net positive change in energy. The way a positive change is identified is up to the programmer and any fitness function can be chosen to determine this. When a movement results in a positive change in energy, the algorithm retains the step. If a movement produces a negative change in energy the algorithm backtracks and tries again until it makes one that is positive. According to a separate coefficient, the temperature, bad moves have a probability to be treated as good moves, the idea being that a potentially good move might exist that wouldn’t be explored unless the bad move is first navigated past. This temperature coefficient is reduced between epochs - a term which refers to the SA algorithm performing an iteration of movement through the multi-dimensional space and the subsequent calculation about the overall change in energy. Over time, this means that the tolerance for bad moves to be treated as good decreases and the algorithm becomes less prone to change.

SA was implemented to search for the parameter combinations of the synthesiser where quietness was maximised. The 24 parameters of the synthesiser were bound to a single input using a noise function with a simplex basis. This single input scans a three dimensional map, creating deterministic outcomes for similar input values with the noise function fixing relationships between the parameters at any given point. The system cannot specifically adjust any of the 24 parameters and has to work with its single input to find the combination of parameters in the noise map at which energy is maximised. 

As I was interested in finding the parameter combinations on the synthesiser that produced quiet ‘edge case’ sounds, I decided that the SA algorithm should try to optimise a measurement of perceived loudness. To this end, ‘perceptual loudness’ of the output is measured every epoch with Alex Harker’s [descriptorsrt~](www.alexanderjharker.co.uk/Software.html) object. By inverting the descriptor value sign, a movement that increases the loudness in dB (tending toward 0) is considered bad, while anything that results in a movement toward negative infinity is considered good. As a result, the piece becomes a structural and formal representation of the SA algorithm attempting to make the synth as quiet as possible.

A number of iterations of output from the system have been included in this progression report alongside a patch that demonstrates the parameter controls and the measured output as perceptual loudness. I consider the file labelled ‘Annealing Strategies.wav’ as the output that satisfied my initial goals most suitably and the one that I present first and foremost for this work. I have also included a number of other iterations that were relatively successful, but had their flaws. I will not go into an in depth discussion of why I consider them to be flawed, but I invite discussion around this concept of curating the output in the progression viva. Without going into significant detail, there a number of reasons that this iteration was chosen.

- Micro- and macroscopic form resolve themselves across the system without having to specifically implement them programatically at a low level.
- Loud, full spectrum sounds dominate the first half of the piece and eventually ‘edge cases’ are honed into by the simulated annealing algorithm. This evokes a strong sense of intentionality and direction while giving freedom at the micro- and mesoscopic levels for there to be twists and turns. 
- Sectional referencing and recapitulation of ideas
    - 0:00” and 0:25” - phrase repetition and variation
    - 2:37” and 2:44” - extended iterations of an upwards glissando
    - 0:20” and 0:55” - recapitulated low section acting as a counterpoint to high register material
- Unplanned development of pitch and noise material from a composite sound to audibly separate entities. Throughout, pitch and noise are often presented in opposition to each other with pitch prevailing at the start and noise material featuring toward the end. Throughout the iteration there is interplay between these two sound archetypes and their individual behaviours evolve.
    - 1:11” - Untangling/divergence of pitch and noise
    - 2:43” - Wavering glissandi appear for the pitch element
    - 2:39” - Noise becomes to stabilise when prevalent

My plan is to formalise the narrative of development of Annealing Strategies as an article for submission to the Journal of Creative Music Systems, to open up the compositional and technical evolution, and to relate to compositional concerns in the metacreative composition practice. In particular, this piece helped me deal with the infinite regress of modelling my own compositional tendencies by using the simulated annealing algorithm to abstractly interface with musical form through parameters and some behaviours inherent to the heuristic. I would like to delve deeper into the sociological aspect of the work - addressing the nature of community driven code and locating the ‘work’ in this aesthetic object. Furthermore, I would like to touch on how highly technical works are listened to by techno-fluent composers through both an aesthetic appreciation as well as a technical appreciation. I see this article feeding directly into the PhD thesis, and it will be useful for developing the methodology and honing my critical reflection around this piece.

## Refracted Touch

This is a relatively new piece for electronics and slide guitar that was performed in May this year by [Daryl Buckley](https://twitter.com/darylelision?lang=en). Putting together this work was a useful professional experience for me as at a certain date I had to implement a ‘composition freeze’ and work toward stabilising the technical aspects of the work. As a result, I did not achieve some of my more abstract goals in this work, and I found myself running into the same problems as I did with interactive works that I discussed in [Part One]({{< ref "docs/progression report/2-part one/_index.md" >}}) I would have liked to draw across some of the more automatic procedures that were incorporated into Annealing Strategies, but I felt that there was too much of a performance risk given that we didn’t have much time to experiment with the system, and spent the majority of our time making the piece functional.  Daryl has been more than generous and we intend to work on a second iteration of the work at some point in the future.

The gist of the piece is that the performer can fluidly navigate through a linear series of ‘panels’. These panels contain written instructions including performative actions, specific techniques and interactive prompts. Here are two examples:

THERE WILL BE SOME IMAGES HERE

An important structural aspect of *Refracted Touch* is how the performer responds to the central bar displayed to them alongside the instructions. This bar is representative of progress through the current panel and is incremented at a rate that is directly correlated to the intensity of the instrumentalist. Intense playing results in faster progression through a section while quiet playing gives them more time to interact within the active state of the electronics. Each panel possesses a unique sensitivity coefficient, at times forcing the performer to work within delicate dynamic ranges so that they do not complete the section almost instantly. Conversely, they may have to work extremely hard in other panels to move the piece forward because the sensitivity is low. My intention was to have the computer behave more provocatively through this mechanism and to not be a temporal slave to the performer. I wanted time to be a negotiation between the computer and performer throughout the piece, giving rise to sections in which both parties are pushing on each other and feeding off their contribution to the music as a whole. I thought that this strategy would help mitigate a situation where the performer would act as a ‘driver’ of the system - allowing more bilateral interactions to occur between the computer and Daryl.

My reflections on this piece are still relatively nascent and I haven’t formalised to the extent that I have in either Annealing Strategies or Stitch/Strata. I’m still somewhat uncomfortable working in the paradigm of interactive electronics for many of the reasons that were made clear to me in 2017 at the beginning of the PhD and my feeling is that working in this way is not how the practice aspect of the research will develop. That said, it was a vital experience to revisit this practice and to reflect on how my relationship to the computer has changed since the start of the PhD.

## New Work
I am currently working on a new piece for fixed media that employs an intensive scraping process on a large chunk of data on my computer (or theoretically any computer). The scraping process walks through a disk drive, taking any file and treating it as header-less lossless audio. A precomposed wave file header is prepended to the raw bytes, making the operating system or another program recognise the file as playable audio. So far, I am occupied with collecting sonic materials and developing methods for navigating the immense amount of audio produced by the scraping process. Although this piece is at quite a nascent stage, I am trying to minimise my direct influence on musical structures and organisation and see myself in this piece as a curator of found ‘musical objects’ which are already in the computer and have been formed through non-musical actions. I am investigating machine learning techniques for dimensionality reduction and classification to try and understand, slice and reorganise the numerous gestures and textures that are produced in the scraping process. I am also interested by techniques such as self organising maps and principal component analysis, specifically for their morphogenic properties that emerge as the models are trained. I have previously avoided exploring or using these technologies for fear of engaging in technical fetishism that seems to be prevalent in the area of computing and particularly around the buzz terms ‘machine learning’ and ‘artificial intelligence’. That said, I feel that this piece is requiring me to delve further into the technological side to deal with the scope and nature of the material and to investigate computer behaviours that can be exhibited through more complex processes.

Through this work, I hope to develop aspects of my artist-programmer practice that germinated in Annealing Strategies. I want to make a significant leap forward in my compositional method by exploring more rigorous and demanding technologies that I have otherwise avoided. Learning to integrate new processes for analysis and organisation will help me to enable the computer in ways that were previously not possible, giving me more room as a curator of its outputs, rather than directly controlling it to achieve what I want musically. I envisage the shape of this work to contain numerous ‘outputs’ (not iterations of the same work as was seen in Annealing Strategies) perhaps culminating in an album or compilation of pieces. There is such a wealth of material that has already been produced in the early stages of scraping, that I think grouping the conceptual and formal organisation of these materials into distinct strategies and thus outputs will be an apt method for presenting the work. This also prevents me from discarding much of the material in an attempt to make a single cohesive work.

I intend to take an additional write up year in 2020 to 2021 to give me as much time to focus on the creative aspect of this thesis in the coming year. For the remainder of this academic year, I intend to finish ‘New Work’ (title pending), and to work toward a draft of the JCMS article. This leaves me in the position for next year to focus on the development of two or three more works bringing my total amount of creative outputs into the anticipated range of 6-8. This also puts me in a position to finish the article, which will lead nicely into the write up year.