---
title: Part Two
weight: 3
bookFlatSection: false
---

# Part Two

## Background
21st century advances in computer processing power have extended the potential of computers in music beyond their origins as a studio tool to an instrument, creative collaborator and cognitive extension capable of complex sound analysis and synthesis in real-time and live performance. Through creative coding environments (CCE) the computer has emerged as a powerful interface for composers to model ideas in computational forms and employ them as a mediating layer for their creativity. The computer has not yet developed to fulfil the desires of utopian technologists and remains obedient to the commands of the user - however, the immense computational power and subsequent technologies in the form of hardware and software have shifted the role of the computer from something fixed to something with agency that can engage with users in a quasi-intelligent fashion. The role of the computer has shifted ‘from that of a “tool” under the direct control of the artist, through to that of a collaborator or creative partner’ (McCormack et al., 2014, p. 4), an entity that can feed-back into the development of a work.

As a collaborator and creative partner, the computer is situated with two perspectives of the creative process. One perspective is oriented outward from the composer in which the computer acts as a transformative medium. The composer abstracts and realises musical processes in algorithms and automated functions that are deployed to the computer and executed. This process can control direct sonic events, structural patterns or can be mapped to a number of modular software or hardware objects. The other perspective repositions the computer as a feedback device, its outputs leading the composer to new territories for investigation, challenging their compositional preconceptions or reinforcing the development of ideas through successful realisation. The composer oscillates between these two stages allowing the computer to feed into and shape ideas over time.

## Research Aims
This PhD project presents my research as practice and as an interrogation of this practice. I will make apparent my relationship to the computer and provide a diachronic account for its changing role and integration into my artistic practice. I position myself as an artist-programmer that uses metacreative systems in an iterative and reflexive compositional process. In this process, I encode ideas in algorithmic forms, employing the computer to deal with the complexities of calculating, storing and mapping data to musical objects. The computer produces an output from the algorithm, in the form of sound or visuals (readable data, graphics) that informs me of the actions taken. Both the successes and failures promote further experimentations with the algorithmic representation of an idea and act as a feedback mechanism to develop or subvert the compositional process, provoking me to grow my ideas with the help of the computer. Compositional ideas often begin as purely technical interests, imagined system behaviours or interactive dynamics within a system. As I set out to realise the complexities of these ideas and come in contact with artefacts produced by the system, the collision between concept and realisation informs future development and territories for exploration.

## Areas of Investigation and Method

Areas of investigation and Method
This PhD project is about exploring my the computer and my relationship to it in my compositional practice. This relationship is characterised by a reflexive dialogue whereby my  interactions with the computer help to grow and develop musical ideas in ways not possible without the contribution of the computer. To explore this, I will compose a number of portfolio works that each focus on enabling the computer to behave metacreatively in a variety of ways, hopefully, giving rise to new and unexpected musical outputs. I anticipate that this portfolio will be comprised of 6-8 finished works, with the overarching trajectory of the portfolio demonstrating increasing computer agency and responsibility for artistic choices. Each work will include finalised sonic renderings as performances or studio recordings, and may also have supporting material such as code, scores and iterative outputs generated in the development process. Fundamentally, this research will contribute an individual approach to composing electronic music with metacreative systems that centres the research from a practitioner's point of view. Often this area of investigation into computers is highly theoretical and more adequately articulated in non-artistic disciplines and so I hope to provide a detailed technical and aesthetic commentary on a practice that involves computers in this way. 

So far, a major theme that has emerged and will be explored further is the 'friction' between formalisation and realisation of ideas. In the 'Current Work' section that follows I address problems that have arisen in specific pieces when I have set out to model and formalise multiple hierarchical levels of form in a computational domain. In my practice, I want the computer to be able to help design forms and create organisations of material across different perceptual time scales, however, approaching this as a structuralist in which each perceptual level is designed, formalised and realised has often proved unfruitful and laborious. Harnessing emerging technologies (such as machine learning) has helped to solve this problem by constructing scenarios in which the computer is tasked to not only generate, but perform selection based on deeply trained and complex models. A result of this is a loss of direct control over the computer's behaviours with a counterbalanced gain in 'influence' over the machine, a concept that has been described previously by Alberto de Campo (De Campo, 2014) . This is a rich area of investigation that will permeate the portfolio works, highlighting mechanisms and strategies by which I relinquish direct control to the computer and work in an influential manner.

Another thread that will be investigated is machine aesthetics, and their role in my work as I have increasingly delegated control to the computer. In particular the latest work 'New Work' (described later) exhibits a machine aesthetic arising as a pre-conceptual feature, rather than as an aesthetic choice that is specifically chosen while accruing and selecting musical materials.  While much of my practice has been focused on having the computer control organisation of ideas, in this new work the computer generates material through models that have little relevance to traditional schemes of synthesis or sound production. In short, I am interested in what the computer can produce on its own, or inherently has produced in the past and that can be accessed through code and inspection of data as sound. This thread is more nascent, but has become more prominent in my thinking and practice especially on reflection of the last 2-3 years of work.

## Approach to the Commentary

I predict the written component to total between 30000 - 40000 words. The written component will function as a commentary on the creative works, explicating the creative process from inception to completion. This will be articulated in the form of a narrative of development (NoD), exposing various stages and versions of the works in both musical and software format. There is an inextricable link between these two elements and tracking their parallel development will demonstrate the depth at which these are tangled in my practice and reach out to external research themes and questions about the field at large. The NoD may discuss a number of artefacts produced from the compositional process: code from various CCEs, version control history (git), sound examples, recordings, performances and technical documentation. The purpose of the NoD is to track my relationship to the computer and to assist in providing sufficient technical and aesthetic context for my use of it in the creation of a work.

So far, I am not committed to any number of texts that will form the theoretical basis of the commentary. I personally do not feel that theoretical texts contribute much, if anything to my  creative thought and the way that I incorporate the computer into making music. Theoretical texts are more useful for me by providing models for tracking creativity and process in an post-facto context. As such, the following texts will help the research project in this way, by providing theoretical context to my reflection in the commentary. The NoD will draw on Jean-Jacques Nattiez’s tripartite model of musical semiology (Nattiez, 1990) to conceptualise the planning and design process as one that oscillates freely between three cognitive levels.  To be clear, I do not intend to draw on the semiological aspect of Nattiez’ work, rather, I intend to draw more crudely on the three aspects of his model in order to better segment out the various stages of planning and reflection that encompass the wider creative process. The poietic level refers to the setup stages of a work prior to performance, recording or completion. This can include the formulation of aesthetic concepts, and more abstract and vague ideas that might drive the development of the work. Alongside more esoteric concepts, it might also include technical influences from code, pseudo-code or computer science literature. At the poietic level, the consideration is mainly about carving out the investigative territory of a work and creating a grounding for this. The neutral level refers to the materiality of the work - that is, the artefacts produced at the poietic level. This can include sound, code, performances, written scores or printed text for example. Last, the esthesic level grounds itself in introspection and functions as a reflection on the outputs of the creative process. Where Nattiez considers the creation of a work to be a linear process starting with poesies and ending with esthesic review, I tend toward the viewpoint of Henrik Frisk and Stefan Östersjö (Frisk & Östersjö, 2006), that the creation of a work is a constantly oscillating and malleable set of affairs.

Andrew Pickering’s ‘mangle of practice’ (Pickering, 2010) (referred in short as ‘the mangle’) provides an epistemological framework that shares a great deal of overlap in how I think about the reflexive interaction with the computer in generating ideas. Although largely philosophical in tone, and focused more toward convincing the hard sciences that practice-based research is able to generate equivalent knowledge, I think that Pickering’s viewpoint may be critical to this research project and is too relevant to ignore. Pickering conceptualises the process of acquiring knowledge in research through two idioms - the representational and the performative. Representational science seeks to ‘represent nature and to produce knowledge that maps, mirrors, or corresponds to how the world really is’ (Pickering, 2010, p. 5). The disembodied scientist sets forth in the world to accrue facts and knowledge from their observable surroundings - they are a conduit for the data and information that is out there and are a vehicle for harnessing knowable truths that are tacit in the environment. The performative ‘goes beyond science-as-knowledge, to include the material, social and temporal dimensions of science’ (Pickering, 2010, p. 6). It is an acknowledgement that the world is a place full of ‘agency’ first, and that knowledge is generated through interactions with the world. Pickering frames this interaction as one that is mediated by machines that are able to capture the ‘material agency’ around us in a number of ways. To this end, the mangle conceives knowledge generation and artefacts of the research as emergent products from the interplay between human and machine.

Pickering paints this relationship as a constant struggle - a back and forth between ‘resistance and accommodation’ (Pickering, 2010, p. 22). The scientist begins by constructing a machine and gauging whether the machine behaviour aligns with an anticipated outcome. If the machine fails to satisfy, exhibiting resistance, human agency takes over, and the scientist intervenes with the machine, adjusting its parameters, removing/replacing its parts and making changes that can help close the gap between prediction and result. The scientist accommodates the resistance, finding new ways to manage it, remove it or embrace it. This cycle between machine and human agency constitutes the mangle, which at its core is a process with an infinite expiry. Initial goals and aims are revisited and modified throughout the mangle, propelling the search forward into new territories, while setting back the prospect of the machine ever being ‘complete’ in a verifiable sense. This ‘dance of agency’ (Pickering, 2010, p. 21) is formative for both agents and is a catalyst for symbiotic evolution. This research will open up the practice itself and explicate the oscillations between resistance and accommodations and the development of theoretical concepts and artistic outcomes as a process that is mediated by the computer.

[Next Page]({{< ref "docs/progression report/4-current work/_index.md" >}})
