---
title: Part One
weight: 2
bookFlatSection: false
---

# Part One

Since the previous progression viva in 2018, my research project has shifted in both its theoretical and practical scope. I came to Huddersfield with a strong relationship to technology in both performance and composition and my initial intentions for pursuing the PhD were grounded in the desire to explore computer creativity as a feature and central aspect of my practice. My practice prior to arrival in the UK was mostly concerned with the computer as an interactive musical black-box, behaving on its own, responding to performers and being an active member of small live musical settings. Engaging with this practice, I was concerned with developing my use of the computer to enable it to operate beyond the function of an ‘in the moment’ digital sound processing unit (akin to a guitar pedal or effects rig) and was working toward a number of systems that could contribute to the sophisticated shape of an improvisation through time. Each system possessed different analytical, synthesis and responsive capabilities, depending on the collaborating instrumentalist or the concepts I was interested in exploring at the time. There are a number of external forces that cultivated working in this way, which are worth discussing as they give insight to this period of my practice and contextualise how my research has progressed away from this and into some relevant but divergent territories.

## Living in Australia

While living in Australia, my wider social circle were almost entirely instrumentalists developing experimental improvisatory practices. These people were my sources of collaboration and formed a community of musicians that were willing to experiment with the musical systems that I was creating. A number of pieces reflect these collaborations and relationships that I had built, including Traced Over (2016) and Biomimicry (2017). These strong personal relationships made it feasible to experiment with the computer in highly contingent environments as a quasi-intelligent agent that could interact with improvisors in real-time. These improvisers were close friends, and were willing to embrace the difficulties of these systems, to forge working relationships with them and accept that in this type of setup the outcome can be prone to failure for a number of reasons. Not being an avid instrumentalist myself, the connection between my creative coding practice and an external improvisor(s) became central to my working method and established a clear distinction of roles in the presentation, recording and performance of the resulting music. I would be responsible for programming the computer and the improvisor(s) would improvise with it. This way of working was not unique and there is a vast community of people creating music in various configurations of this setup. In particular, I was drawn to the works of Adam Lindson, Oliver Bown and Ben Carey who are themselves artist-programmers that have created their own musical systems and a performative practice with these systems. Thus, I saw this strand of practice-based research and compositional method as one with a fertile basis and a convivial community to support it.

Moving to Huddersfield displaced me from all of my personal connections that had until then played an integral role in my compositional practice. Of course, there was always the possibility of finding new instrumentalists - however, this requires time to build rapport with people, and to find individuals who are interested in improvising with computers. In response to a suggestion from my supervisors, I tasked myself with creating a work for only the computer drawing on existing threads in my work with interactive systems and improvisors. This task culminated in a performance this academic year at the 2019 Electric Spring Festival titled Stitch/Strata (2019). Throwing myself into unfamiliar territory both technically and artistically elicited a non-trivial reflection on my practice up to this point. Rich formal and structural phenomena emerging from the interactions between computer and improvisor were heavily weighted toward the performer’s guidance of the system and expertise dealing with form in the moment, rather than from the system itself processing these inputs. In the systems I had created up to this point, the real-time evolution of form and structure was entirely on the shoulders of the performer pushing the system in a way that served them. Surprise, provocation and moments of unexpected interaction often were the results of the performer ‘gaming’ the system by learning its functions and finding the edges at which it broke down, rather than engaging in a genuine musical dialogue with the system. We might say the communicative relationship was unilateral, rather than bilateral, and the performer had to drive the system rather than genuinely interacting with it.

## Questioning the role of the computer

This made me question the role of the computer in my practice more generally. If the computer was not achieving what I thought it was, how could I revisit the technicity of my practice in order to better explore the musical outcomes that I was interested in achieving? I also began to interrogate the value of using the computer in this way, and what it allowed me to do that was not possible with another compositional method, or perhaps in a more instrumental context. Some informal notes ranging from the beginning of the PhD to now have been collated here that emerged from my reflection on what I wanted to achieve using the computer:

- To proliferate ideas through encoding and modelling.
- To elicit challenge and surprise. 
- To provoke me as an artist.
- Challenge ‘paths of least resistance’.
- To be a substrate of my creativity. 
- Incorporate the inherent features of the computer - - and its behaviour - how a computer manages a task compared to a human.
- Interplay between constraints and how a naive implementation can grow.
- Navigating a space for me.
- I want to be led to the idea.
- Allowing the tech to intervene at some point (real time, composition time).
- Focus and access the artefacts produced from ‘computerly’ behaviours.
- Make tacit knowledge known. Turn the implicit into the explicit.

Unfortunately, I don’t have similar notes available from prior to coming to Huddersfield - however, I can intuit that this collation of aims is somewhat representative of a longer strand of interests that I have had in using computers for composition that has spanned a considerable range of my works. The defining aspect of the evolution in my practice has been a movement away from the paradigm of live interactive electronics toward works where the computer is used non-performatively - as a compositional aid, provocateur and an aesthetic object in and of itself. The performer is obviously an integral part of the live electronics practice, demonstrating to the listener their own instrumental expertise in parallel with a system’s ability to support and feed off this virtuosity. This relationship has to be managed as a technical and compositional concern, with the bulk of the creative work belonging to the process of constructing algorithms and mechanisms for enabling interaction and thus the music itself. Working in the paradigm of live interactive electronics requires me to focus a lot of time and attention on this aspect, and I am now generally more concerned with what the computer can do without a performer interacting with it. As such, a move into the computer seems to characterise where my practice is going, and how the research as practice will be focused in order to answer questions about my relationship to the computer.

[Next Page]({{< ref "docs/progression report/3-part two/_index.md" >}})